---
layout: post
title:  Why I Am Not a Unitarian Universalist
---

> Religion must remain an outlet for people who say to themselves, "I am not
> the kind of person I want to be."  It must never sink into an assemblage of
> the self-satisfied.
> 
> -- Frank Herbert, Dune

### Personal Background

I grew up in a charismatic, fundamentalist, evangelical Christian church in
rural Tennessee.  Theologically, it was pretty much what you'd imagine --
minus the snakes.  Contrary to the common hypocritical stereotypes, my church
community was in large part made-up of honest, intelligent, kind folks.  I
would not be what I am today (the good parts anyway) without their influence.

From as far back as I can remember until roughly seventeen years old, I
believed everything my church leaders taught me:  that the (*Protestant*)
Bible was the inerrant word of God, that a Jewish carpenter of Iron Age
Palestine was the literal manifestation of God in human form, that said
carpenter lived a morally perfect life, was crucified as a sacrifice to atone
for the sins of all humanity, and rose from the dead after three days to
conquer death so that everyone who believed in him would live forever in
heaven.  I spent a good deal of my free time studying scripture and
apologetics.  When I had the courage, I would evangelize to "the lost", too.
I wanted to know Truth and to speak truthfully.

When I turned seventeen, I was still very active in the church -- I played
drums for the worship team and lead a few youth bible studies -- but I began
having doubts about the truth of scripture.  I started noticing contradictions
between the gospels.[^1]  The God of the Old Testament began to seem outright
evil.[^2]  Once I began to question the Bible, I began questioning all of the
Christian theology and ethics that relied on it.  By my early twenties and
after much soul searching, I no longer had any reason to believe that God
existed.

[^1]:  Matt 1:1-17, Luke 3:23-38.  The common explanation for the differences
       between the geneologies of Jesus is that one is Mary's lineage and the
       other is Joseph's.  However, both gospels *state explicitly* that they
       represent Joseph's lineage.

[^2]:  Exodus 9:12, 11:5.  God removes Pharaoh's free will so that Pharaoh
       will not free the Israelites.  Then, just to show off, God kills
       a bunch of Egyptians who were completely innocent of enslaving the
       Israelites.

Note that my break with the Christian faith and my eventual atheism had
nothing to do with any negative experiences from my church family nor did it
have anything to do with me wanting to "live in sin".  I still wanted to know
Truth and to speak truthfully, but I was no longer convinced that Christian
scripture necessarily contained any more truth than any other book.

Several years later I moved to Texas and there started attending a Unitarian
Universalist (UU) church.  I had no experience with the UU religion until I
walked through the doors.  I began attending because I missed having a church
community (having spent most of my life with one) and assumed (rightly) that
the UU church would be a much more open-minded version of the Christian
tradition that I was familiar with.

### The Unitarian Universalist Ideal

I began learning about what UUs believed.  Theologically speaking, the closest
the UU religion has to an official creed are the Seven Principles and
Purposes:

1. The inherent worth and dignity of every person;
2. Justice, equity and compassion in human relations;
3. Acceptance of one another and encouragement to spiritual growth in our
   congregations;
4. A free and responsible search for truth and meaning;
5. The right of conscience and the use of the democratic process within our
   congregations and in society at large;
6. The goal of world community with peace, liberty and justice for all;
7. Respect for the interdependent web of all existence of which we are a part.

As you can imagine, such a liberal theology invites an awfully broad range of
spiritual beliefs.  Within the church questions of spiritual belief are a
personal choice, i.e. everyone is free to decide for themselves what they
believe with respect to deities, the meaning of life, etc.  I attended church
with many self-proclaimed Jews, Muslims, Christians, Wiccans, Humanists, and
the kitchen sink.

In theory one would assume that such open-mindedness, supported by a strong
ethical foundation, would be spiritually edifying.  Members of the church
would be exposed to and have the opportunity to draw from a wide range of
religious and cultural traditions.  One's own spiritual beliefs would be
constantly measured against those of others without combativeness in an
environment of acceptance.  No one's spiritual beliefs would be based on any
sort of rigid dogma and, therefore, could be more easily changed when new
knowledge or arguments presented themselves.[^3]

[^3]:  "Iron sharpeneth iron; so a man sharpeneth the countenance of his
       friend."  Proverbs 27:17

That's not to say that the church supported all beliefs without limit.  Even
though the UU religion allows a broad range of spiritual beliefs, the church
teachings take a narrower stance with respect to ethical matters.  A member
could not, for example, support a racist ideology and still be a UU.
Similarly, to hate another person for their sexual orientation or to refuse to
help the poor would be to go against the core of UUism.  Of course, one may
fairly say that such stances are the bare minimum ethical beliefs, but the
point to take away should be that the members of the church *lived* those
ethical beliefs.  The church itself provided food and shelter for the homeless
on cold nights, and most of the people I met there were heavily involved in at
least one charity.  They were good people who wanted to help others.

### The Spiritual Environment

The longer I attended the more I noticed that the liberal theology the UU
church practiced actually ran counter to two of their Seven Principles and
Purposes, specifically "encouragement to spiritual growth" and
"**responsible** search for truth and meaning".  Members of the church never
actually *discussed* their beliefs with one another; they *shared* their
beliefs.  For example a number of members would be talking after service:  A
Muslim might say something like, "There is only one God, and Muhammad is his
prophet."  Then a Humanist would state that he didn't believe in any gods.
And finally, a Wiccan would expound at length on how ultimately everything is
God because everything in the universe contains "a spark of the divine".  Then
after a brief pause everyone would nod thoughtfully, proud of their obvious
open-mindedness at **not acknowledging the inherent contradictions in what
they all had just said**.

Not once, the whole time I attended, did anyone ever offer their reasons for
believing as they did, nor did anyone ever ask another to justify their
beliefs.[^4]  In practice such an enviroment did not encourage one to seek the
truth, responsibly or otherwise; it encouraged spiritual stagnation and
complacency.  The thing is, while there certainly is such a thing as personal
meaning, there is no such thing as personal truth.  Reality is true, and there
is only one reality.  The search for truth is the process of aligning our
beliefs with reality.  This process is important because it helps us answer
the most important question:  What *now*?  The answer to this question helps
us move past just the bare minimum ethical responsibilities.  It helps us
understand our and others' place in the world.  The individual who cannot
begin to ask that question is a spiritual infant.

[^4]:  The only time anyone ever came close to challenging my beliefs was when
       I told another man that I was trying to read the Bible cover to cover.
       A look of disgust fell over his face, and he responded, "What would you
       ever want to do that for?!"  I consider his question the exception
       which proves the rule.

That's not to say that an environment which merely accepts all spiritual
beliefs is wrong for everyone.  I met a lot of people while I was in the
church who had been scarred by other religions and other churches.  They
didn't need their beliefs challenged.  These people just needed a community
that would accept them for who they were.  They were wounded and needed a
place to heal, and I think the UU church was the perfect place for them for
that point in their lives.  I do believe, though, that a place of spiritual
comfort is not the place that anyone should remain indefinitely.  One's
beliefs should change the way one lives one's life, not the other way around.

### The Political Environment

Services in our church always started with either a lay-leader or our pastor
stating that our church was an inclusive church which welcomed everyone
regardless of gender, race, religion, sexual orientation, etc.  The welcome
would go on and on, and sometimes the speaker would have a bit of fun with it.
On one occasion our pastor went off-script and ended the welcome with "...and
Republicans."  And the congregation laughed.  Because it was a joke.

Nearly all of the congregation is made-up of politically left-leaning members.
This is unsuprising because one would assume that a religion which champions
the acceptance of a broad range of spiritual beliefs would also champion a
number of feminist, LBGT, and social equality issues which tend to be
supported on the left-end of the political spectrum.  There is, however, a
silent minority of secret conservatives within the church.  They remain secret
and silent because to openly admit that they support *some* conservative
social and economic policies would be to risk being ostracized by their church
family.

I had many conservative friends while I was in Texas.  A few of them were
Republicans who tended, spiritually, towards a more liberal view of
Christianity.  In some cases they were dissatisfied with their church, and I
knew that *spiritually* they would have thrived in UUism.  But I never
suggested that they visit the UU church.  As much as they might have enjoyed
the service, they would have been run out of the church within ten minutes of
fellowship with politically intolerant liberals who think all conservatives
are evil or stupid or both.

It continues to amaze me how a community which is so spiritually open-mineded
could be so politically narrow-minded.  Most of the members of the
congregation have never considered that a pro-life advocate might reasonably
extend "the inherent worth and dignity of every person" to an unborn child or
that the death penalty -- responsibly and judiciously used -- might support,
rather than undermine, "*justice* ... in human relations" or that there may be
no contradiction in supporting strong national borders and still hoping for
"the goal of world community".  I'm not saying that all these political
stances are right or that all UUs should support them, but surely a community
which claims to support "the right of conscience and the use of the democratic
process" can recognize the danger of a political echo-chamber.

#### Footnotes:
